Subnet network upgrade (#979)
ava-labs/avalanche-docs: docs/subnets/subnet-upgrade.md

# How to Upgrade a Subnet

In the course of Subnet operation, you will inevitably need to upgrade or change some part of the software stack that is running your Subnet. If nothing else, you will have to upgrade the AvalancheGo node client. Same goes for the VM plugin binary that is used to run the blockchain on your Subnet, which is most likely the subnet-evm, the Subnet implementation of the Ethereum virtual machine. Also, you may want to change the configuration of the VM. This tutorial will guide you through the process of doing various Subnet upgrades and changes. We will point out things to watch out for and precautions you need to be mindful about.

:::warning

> Upgrades are pretty delicate operations you need to be very careful about because wrong configuration, procedural mistakes or a botched upgrade can halt your subnet or even lead to data loss!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NETWORK UPGRADES PERMANENTLY CHANGE THE RULES OF YOUR SUBNET

Procedural mistakes or a botched upgrade can halt your subnet or lead to data loss!

When performing a subnet upgrade, every single validator on the Subnet will need to perform the identical upgrade. If you are coordinating a network upgrade, you must schedule advance notice to every subnet validator so that they have time to perform the upgrade prior to activation.
```

Subnets can operate normally only if validators representing 80% or more of the cumulative validator weight is connected. If the amount of connected stake falls close to or below 80% Subnet performance (time to finality) will suffer, and ultimately the Subnet will halt (stop processing transactions).

You as a Subnet operator need to ensure that whatever you do, at least 80% of the validators' cumulative weight is connected and working.

:::info
When assigning weight to the nodes, always use values greater than 20, as that is the default value of `snow-sample-size` network parameter and thus a minimum cumulative amount that is needed for normal Subnet operation. Recall that a validator's weight can't be changed while it is validating, so take care to use an appropriate value.
:::

## Upgrading subnet validator nodes

> AvalancheGo, the node client that is running the Avalanche validators is under constant and rapid development. New versions come out often (roughly every two weeks), bringing added capabilities, performance improvements or security fixes. Updates are usually optional, but from time to time (much rarely than regular updates) there will be an update that includes a network upgrade. Those upgrades are mandatory, and any node that does not upgrade in time will go offline when the network upgrade activates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AvalancheGo, the node client that is running the Avalanche validators is under constant and rapid development. New versions come out often (roughly every two weeks), bringing added capabilities, performance improvements or security fixes. Updates are usually optional, but from time to time (much less frequently than regular updates) there will be an update that includes a mandatory network upgrade. Those upgrades are MANDATORY for every node running the subnet. Any node that does not perform the update before the activation timestamp will immediately stop working when the upgrade activates.
```

> That's why having a node upgrade strategy is pretty important, and you should always strive to run the latest version of the AvalancheGo client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's why having a node upgrade strategy is absolutely vital, and you should always update to the latest AvalancheGo client immediately when it is made available.
```

Reviewer: This actually seems a bit out of place here because it conflates updating AvalancheGo with updating their network.

Reviewer: I think many people may get confused on this point.

For a general guide on upgrading AvalancheGo check out [this tutorial](../nodes/maintain/upgrade-your-avalanchego-node.md). When upgrading Subnet nodes and keeping in mind the previous section, make sure to stagger node upgrades and start a new upgrade only once the previous node has successfully upgraded. Use the [Health API](../apis/avalanchego/apis/health.md#healthhealth) to check that `healthy` value in the response is `true` on the upgraded node, and on other Subnet validators check that [platform.getCurrentValidators()](../apis/avalanchego/apis/p-chain.md#platformgetcurrentvalidators) has `true` in `connected` attribute for the upgraded nodes `nodeID`. Once those two conditions are satisfied, node is confirmed to be online and validating the Subnet and you can start upgrading another node.

Continue the upgrade cycle until all the Subnet nodes are upgraded.

## Upgrading subnet VM plugin binaries

> Besides the AvalancheGo client itself, new versions get released for the VM binaries that run the blockchains on the Subnet. On most Subnets, that is the [subnet-evm](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm), so we'll discuss that, but the procedure is the similar for other VMs as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides the AvalancheGo client itself, new versions get released for the VM binaries that run the blockchains on the Subnet. On most Subnets, that is the [subnet-evm](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm), so this tutorial will go through the steps for updating the subnet-evm binary. The update process will be similar for updating plugin binaries of other VMs as well.
```

cp subnet-evm ~/avalanche-node/plugins/srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy
```
After you do that, you can start the node back up (if running as service do `sudo systemctl start avalanchego`). You can monitor the log output on the node to check that everything is ok, or you can use the [info.getNodeVersion()](https://docs.avax.network/apis/avalanchego/apis/info#infogetnodeversion) API to check the versions. Example output would look like:
```json
{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "result": {
        "version": "avalanche/1.7.18",
        "databaseVersion": "v1.4.5",
        "gitCommit": "b6d5827f1a87e26da649f932ad649a4ea0e429c4",
        "vmVersions": {
            "avm": "v1.7.18",
            "evm": "v0.8.15",
            "platform": "v1.7.18",
            "sqja3uK17MJxfC7AN8nGadBw9JK5BcrsNwNynsqP5Gih8M5Bm": "v0.0.7",
            "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy": "v0.2.9"
        }
    },
    "id": 1
}
```
Note that entry next to the VM ID we upgraded correctly says `v0.2.9`. You have successfully upgraded the VM!

Refer to the previous section on how to make sure node is healthy and connected before moving on to upgrading the next Subnet validator.

> ## Changing subnet configuration

Reviewer: Isn't this a repeat of the `network-upgrade.md` doc?

Subnets can operate normally only if validators representing 80% or more of the cumulative validator weight is connected. If the amount of connected stake falls close to or below 80% Subnet performance (time to finality) will suffer, and ultimately the Subnet will halt (stop processing transactions).

You as a Subnet operator need to ensure that whatever you do, at least 80% of the validators' cumulative weight is connected and working.

:::info
When assigning weight to the nodes, always use values greater than 20, as that is the default value of `snow-sample-size` network parameter and thus a minimum cumulative amount that is needed for normal Subnet operation. Recall that a validator's weight can't be changed while it is validating, so take care to use an appropriate value.
:::

## Upgrading Subnet Validator Nodes

> AvalancheGo, the node client that is running the Avalanche validators is under constant and rapid development. New versions come out often (roughly every two weeks), bringing added capabilities, performance improvements or security fixes. Updates are usually optional, but from time to time (much less frequently than regular updates) there will be an update that includes a mandatory network upgrade. Those upgrades are MANDATORY for every node running the subnet. Any node that does not perform the update before the activation timestamp will immediately stop working when the upgrade activates.

Reviewer 2: Make **MANDATORY** bold in addition to being all caps.

That's why having a node upgrade strategy is absolutely vital, and you should always update to the latest AvalancheGo client immediately when it is made available.

> For a general guide on upgrading AvalancheGo check out [this tutorial](../nodes/maintain/upgrade-your-avalanchego-node.md). When upgrading Subnet nodes and keeping in mind the previous section, make sure to stagger node upgrades and start a new upgrade only once the previous node has successfully upgraded. Use the [Health API](../apis/avalanchego/apis/health.md#healthhealth) to check that `healthy` value in the response is `true` on the upgraded node, and on other Subnet validators check that [platform.getCurrentValidators()](../apis/avalanchego/apis/p-chain.md#platformgetcurrentvalidators) has `true` in `connected` attribute for the upgraded nodes `nodeID`. Once those two conditions are satisfied, node is confirmed to be online and validating the Subnet and you can start upgrading another node.

Reviewer 2: Should "nodes" in this sentence have an `'`?

> attribute for the upgraded nodes `nodeID`.

Should it be

> attribute for the upgraded node's `nodeID`.

All the considerations for doing staggered node upgrades as discussed in previous section are valid for VM upgrades as well.

In the future, VM upgrades will be handled by the [AvalancheCLI tool](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanche-cli), but for now we need to do it manually.

Go to the [releases page](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/releases) of the subnet-evm repository. Locate the latest version, and copy link that corresponds to the OS and architecture of the machine the node is running on (`darwin` = Mac, `amd64` = Intel/AMD processor, `arm64` = Arm processor). Log into the machine where the node is running and download the archive, using `wget` and the link to the archive, like this:

```bash
wget https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/releases/download/v0.2.9/subnet-evm_0.2.9_linux_amd64.tar.gz
```

This will download the archive to the machine. Unpack it like this (use the correct filename, of course):

```bash

> tar xvf subnet-evm_0.2.9_linux_amd64.tar.gz

Reviewer 2: Just for clarity—this tutorial should discuss subnet-evm v.0.2.8 and v0.2.9? We discuss v0.2.8 at the top and then start discussing v.0.2.9 here.

Reviewer 3: 0.2.9 is the current version so we use that, json upgrades are present since 0.2.8, which is why it was mentioned above.
